The mainframe is an ever
evolving platform. New features are constantly
being developed, existing components are getting upgrades,
and its capabilities are always being extended
to meet the world's business demands. As it evolved the Mainframe
gained some unique capabilities that you won't find anywhere else, and
I'd like to cover a few of those here. We'll start off with the intelligent
resource director or IRD. The IRD function optimizes processor and channel resource utilization across
LPARs within a single z system. It groups LPARs into an LPAR
cluster allowing WLM to manage resources across the entire cluster
not just in one single image. IRD has the following characteristics. First, it allows for
more flexible LPAR CPU management. Next, thanks to dynamic channel path
management, DCM, FICON channel bandwidth, which is primarily used for
connections to storage devices, can be moved between disk control
units to meet demands as they change. Lastly, channel subsystem priority
queuing allows I/O request in the channel subsystem to have
priorities assigned to them. This allows for even greater control and flexibility when we have important
business objectives to meet. On the network side of things,
HiperSockets provide high-speed connectivity between servers
in the same physical system. These connections are entirely virtual,
so there's no need to run cables or hook connected servers into
a networking infrastructure. You define a HiperSocket and
then virtually connect it to z/OS Linux or ZVM systems. You can even mix and match, to the OS it
looks like a regular networking device. They can now communicate as if they were
plugged into a super high speed network switch, except it's all virtual. Up next, HiperDispatch. So when we virtualize the LPARs, when
there's work to be done the system looks at the pool of available processors and lines up that specific unit of work with
an available processor that can handle it. This is all fine and good, but in some
workloads we gain performance by ensuring that the work is dispatched to the same
processor as frequently as possible. So there's no wait while we figure out
which processor, the work should go on, and we also benefit from
reusing relevant data left in the cache from
previous operations. It's like landing in the airport and
renting a car. If you have to go find the right car each
time and adjust the seat and the mirrors and figure out how to pair the Bluetooth
to your phone in it, that takes time. HiperDispatch is like having your favorite
car parked right outside waiting for you all the time. HiperDispatch really helps WLM in
keeping consistent response times, and definitely helps once you
start scaling up systems with lots of processors
with lots of cores. Now setting up Mainframe hardware
can be a fairly complex task. There are just so many definitions
and bits of information you've got to manage correctly in order
to add storage for example. Fortunately zDAC, the z discovery and autoconfiguration aims to help
make that a little bit easier. It can detect certain devices on FICON and
storage area networks, and streamline the process of configuring the HCD or
hardware configuration definition. This helps to simplify I/O configuration
and reduce complexity and set up time. Virtual flash memory, now earlier we
talked about storage and how virtual memory means that the memory for a program
might go from on-chip memory out to DASD. Well, there's actually
an in-between step and that's where virtual
flash memory comes in. This is storage class memory that lives in
the same physical box as the memory and processors. But can be configured to
provide additional support for programs that take a noticeable
performance hit when they page data like DB2, Java, and the coupling facility. And then there's zAware. As you know, the Mainframe is constantly
gathering data, not just data for business transactions, but information
about what's going on behind the scenes. Network configuration changes,
LPARs coming up, and going down, software levels changing,
new user IDs getting created. And nobody has time to go through all
those log files line by line by line and inspect every single thing
that happens during the day. Fortunately, zAware which stands for z
advanced work load analysis reporter does. It watches everything going on, and
compares what it sees with prior system data, highlighting anomalies,
and suggesting courses of action. It does all of this in near real time. So you can even use zAware's interface
to diagnose the cause of past or current anomalies. As you can see, there's a lot of unique
liese features that you can explore and there's always more in the works.